Was there ever anyone like him? Except Gandalf, of course. I think they must be related.—Peregrin Took on Aragorn
 
Tolkien gives this description of Aragorn in The Lord of the Rings: lean, dark, tall, with "a shaggy head of dark hair flecked with grey, and in a pale stern face a pair of keen grey eyes."
In The Tale of Aragorn and Arwen, he was said to be often grim and sad, with unexpected moments of levity. Some time after the publications of the books, Tolkien wrote that he was six feet six inches tall.
Aragorn possessed Elven wisdom due to his childhood in Rivendell with Elrond and the foresight of the Dúnedain. He was also a skilled healer, notably with the plant Athelas (also known as Kingsfoil). He was also a mighty warrior and an unmatched commander; after the Battle of the Pelennor Fields, he, Éomer, and Imrahil were said to be left unscathed, even though they had been in the thick of the fighting.
 
Though there is no indication of his ever doubting his role and destiny as the future king of the Reunited Kingdom and one of the leaders of the war against Sauron (as he did in Peter Jackson's film), he was not immune to self-doubt, as he doubted the wisdom of his decisions while leading the Fellowship after the loss of Gandalf in Moria, and blamed himself for many of their subsequent misfortunes.
On one occasion his reverential pride for his heritage as caused complications as he refused to disarm and leave his sword Andúril at the door of Edoras as Théoden had required. Aragorn even vocally questioned how the authority of Théoden could supersede his own lineage from that of Elendil. Aragron only acquiesced after Gandalf called out his hubris as only benefiting their enemies well as highlighting that he would surrender his own sword if it meant meeting Théoden. Even so, Aragorn swore that death would come somehow to anyone else that touched it.
He also appeared to possess a nigh-indomitable will. At one point, he was able to psychically challenge Sauron for control of the palantír of Orthanc, and proved victorious in that struggle. It should be noted that even Gandalf the White was reluctant to use the palantír for fear of challenging Sauron directly and revealing himself to the Dark Lord. His fortitude in the face of the Army of the Dead was unwavering and his companions remarked that he was mighty indeed in the strength of his will. He was accounted as "the hardiest of living Men" during his lifetime.
 