"There's no point in trying to dictate what Gale thinks. Which, if I'm honest, is one reason I trust him."
—Katniss
 
Gale enjoys a good laugh when he is with his best friend, Katniss. He can be easy to anger, and often it is Katniss who keeps it under control. He became angry when Madge Undersee said she wanted to look her best if she gets reaped. He became angry because she is more wealthy than most people in District 12 and doesn't have to face what he and everyone else must.
Gale hated the Capitol more than most people, even in the worst districts. During his time in District 12, he frequently complained about the unjust political situation in Panem and the tyranny of the Capitol, in contrast to Katniss, who was taught by her mother to hold her tongue. Throughout the books, Gale mentions several times that he feels that a rebellion would be better than just doing what the Capitol wanted. 
Unlike Katniss, Gale believed in the idea of victory at any cost. He clashed with her over the way the rebellion should be fought. Where she wanted to save as many lives as possible at the risk of defeat, he wanted them to sacrifice a few lives so that they can insure victory. Katniss tries to think in short-term, while Gale thinks in long-term, about how best to preserve life in Panem. This ruthlessness, combined with his hatred for the Capitol causes him to become a leading figure in the rebellion and to come up with new combat tactics while in District 13. Unfortunately, it is also this personality that eventually costs him his relationship with Katniss.
Gale often thinks in black and white terms, meaning something is either wrong or right and rarely does he see a grey area. He is angered that Katniss worries for her prep team when they are held captive as they are from the Capitol, and so are the 'enemy' even though they are relatively innocent.
Gale also had a very idealistic personality. When he believed in something that was being challenged he wouldn't hesitate to fight for it. It is later said by Katniss that Gale's fire, his passion, and personality, was very similar to her own; however, hers was always more controlled. He often accompanied Katniss when she did appearances as the Mockingjay, fighting when they came under attack. He also is the first to volunteer for the mission to save Peeta, though whether this is for Katniss or himself is not known.