"Frankly, I could need some sugarcoating."
—Katniss
 Katniss has strong and independent survivalist instincts due to her difficult past and is good at thinking outside the box. She is not socially adept and has a hard time making friends due to the emotional strain on her life which has made her hard and cold. She is more concerned about feeding her family than being social, making her awkward around people. Though Katniss can be rather blunt, misanthropic, sarcastic, bitingly cynical, and cold, she has a very vulnerable side which she only shows around her family, and she has a natural maternal instinct as showed when she comforted Prim and helped Rue. She is not very good at acting for the camera and comes across best when she is herself. She is usually very logical except for times when her emotions get in the way.
Katniss has a habit of biting her nails when she is nervous or anxious and must consciously stop herself from doing so when around others. After she became a victor she could not think of a good reason to break the habit. However, after joining the rebellion she appears to have stopped biting her nails as she does not mention doing so.
"All I know about you is that you're stubborn and good with a bow.""That pretty much sums me up."
—Peeta and Katniss on the train to District 11.
Katniss is very strong, stubborn, and determined. Often, she will react first and ask questions later. She will do anything to survive. Even when she allied with Rue, she said she hoped that she didn't have to be the one to kill her. Yet when it came to Peeta, she tried her best to figure a way for them both to survive. This independent streak did not go well in the regimented confines of District 13 and Katniss largely did what she wanted and ignored her daily schedule. She had to discipline herself to undergo military training in order to prove that she could be sent into combat, and her unwillingness to take orders was perceived as her greatest weakness. This was targeted during her individual exam, but she was able to realize this and pass.
Even though she can sometimes be a bit self-centered and self-reliant, she does have noble traits, protecting those she loves. For example, caring for Prim, looking out for Rue, and ending Cato's life mercifully even though he caused her so much pain or when she shields Gale to keep him from being whipped, even when it means a lash for herself. Katniss has an instinct to protect those who are weak such as Rue, Wiress, and her prep team.
Unlike her younger sister, she is not a natural born healer. She once ran from the house in fright while Prim and her mother cared for a dying man. She even had trouble healing Peeta, being squeamish, and reluctant to care for him unclothed. Instead, she is more like her father, being skilled at hunting and gathering.
Similar to her father, Katniss had a rebellious streak. She was a fiercely determined and resourceful fighter and was reasonably easy to underestimate. Due to this, she was almost always in disagreement with authority figures and liked to use her own resources when it came to survival (the instincts of a true survivor). Katniss was loyal to no one and had issues when it came to trusting others, but this grew to be her one of her greatest strengths.
In Mockingjay, it is shown that Katniss dislikes being a "pawn" and hates having the weight of Panem on her shoulders.
Katniss suffers from PTSD from her experiences in the Hunger Games throughout the series. This includes frequent nightmares and night terrors of those she killed and tried to kill her, avoidance of others/isolation, irritability, and favoring the wilds of the forest over human contact. 