"And you're the one who was known for being nice."
—Katniss to Peeta
Peeta has a very likable personality and is very charismatic. Kind and gentle, he is also very clever and skilled at manipulating others with his words. Though not brash or arrogant, he can be quite bold, having announced that he was in love with Katniss to the whole nation and offering Thresh and Rue's families part of his and Katniss' winnings. He is a very talented public speaker, to the point that Coin would have preferred to rescue him over Katniss from the Quell. Similarly, he has a good sense of humor and doesn't take himself too seriously.
Possibly unique to Hunger Games Victors, Peeta is very reluctant to get into physical fights and very non-violent, to the point that Finnick would say he is the only Victor who won the Games 'by chance'. He states that he wants to be "more than just a piece in Games", more than the killer the Capitol would want him, a Tribute, to be.
However, when very angry, Peeta has been known to throw objects against walls and shout, so he is not without a temper. He is gentle, but not a pushover; as seen when he breaks Haymitch's wine glass after Haymitch sarcastically tells him to "stay alive" in the Games.
Most notably, Peeta is loving and cares deeply about the people around him. He is described as sweet, gentle, strong, and steady by Katniss several times, and always assumes the best in people, which baffles Katniss who is, by contrast, very skeptical and slow to trust. He is selfless (for his willingness to sacrifice his own life for Katniss's), has a good sense of humor that he uses during tough times, and always knows exactly what to say to make someone feel better. He is able to work with Haymitch on goals and strategy and, unlike Katniss, able to keep secrets and is trusted by Haymitch. It is noted throughout the series his deep understanding of situations such as the Hunger Games where he says, "I don't want to be just a piece in their Games." It took Katniss much longer for her to understand the same concept.
His favorite color is sunset orange. Katniss notices that he always double-knots his shoelaces, sleeps with the windows open, and never takes sugar in his tea.
When he's hijacked, he becomes out-of-control, homicidal, and suicidal. Eventually, through separating "shiny" hijacked memories and real ones, he recovers, though still has flashbacks and trauma.